---
author: leefoxx1949
date: '2008-10-19 17:51:26'
layout: post
slug: reflections-on-the-problem-of-cheating
status: publish
title: Reflections on the Problem of Cheating
wordpress_id: '206'
categories:
- V. Essays and Blogs
tags:
- Essays
---

One thing I frequently hear foreign teachers in China complain about is
cheating. It's almost as if they were totally unfamiliar with this concept
before they came to China. Let me put things into perspective here.

Chinese students cheat. Apparently they have been doing this for quite some
time, because in the Capital Museum in Beijing is a student's cheat sheet
from the old Imperial Examination. But American students cheat, too. The
difference seems to be that the Chinese students are more likely to get
caught. All this really tells me is that Chinese students are not as effective
at cheating as are their American counterparts.

I've been in the teaching business for some thirty years, and, quite frankly,
the cheating I've seen in China doesn't come close in either quantity or
sophistication to the cheating I've seen in America. Let's start with one hard
fact. Studies have been done asking American students whether or not they have
ever cheated. Since these surveys preserve the student's anonymity, there is a
pretty good chance they are a fairly accurate reflection of reality.
Basically, the studies tell us that nearly all American students admit to
having cheated at some time in their academic career, and some do so quite
regularly.

Back when I was a graduate student the campus bulletin boards were full of
notepads advertising papers "for research only." Despite this disclaimer, it
was obvious that the student was purchasing someone else's term paper to
submit as his own work. I experienced some of this personally because I always
assigned a 10-page research paper for students in my **Ancient Near East &
Greece** and my **Ancient Rome** history classes. Imagine my surprise when a
student whose classroom performance indicated he was about as intelligent as a
houseplant submitted a paper worthy of a Pulitzer! Of course today the
Internet has replaced those notepads stapled to bulletin boards. However,
today there also exists technology making it possible for a teacher to
determine whether or not a student paper was obtained from an online databank
or plagiarized from some published source.

Plagiarized term papers, stolen examinations, and students peeking at their
neighbor's answer sheet are but the tip of the iceberg. I was once a professor
at Southern Illinois University at Carbondale. I had a friend there who had
never attended college, but who made a decent living writing master's theses
and doctoral dissertations for other people. All they had to do was submit the
topic, a few sources, and a one-page sample of their writing style, and my
friend did the rest. So I know for a fact that there are people with SIUC
doctorates and masters degrees who never actually earned them. I rather doubt
that my friend was the only person in America with such a lucrative business,
nor that Carbondale was the only school in America producing unearned graduate
degrees. It seems that every year we are treated to yet another example of
some big-name academic who got his/her job on the basis of phony credentials.
I believe the former president of no less an institution than Yale University
recently resigned when it was discovered that her resume had been a fraud.

So when you put it into global perspective, the fact that one Chinese student
at Sias University wrote the answers to his exam on the back of his
girlfriend's neck and then sat directly in back of her during the exam should
not be too shocking. What is more shocking is the extent of corruption rampant
throughout our society, or rather, throughout the entire world. I have often
said that for every example of corruption or dishonesty I have ever
experienced or heard about in China, I have personally witnessed something at
least as bad in America. The fact is that people are pretty much the same
wherever you go in the world.

October 20, 2008

Gary L. Todd, Ph.D.

Professor of History

Sias International University

Xinzheng, Henan, China

