---
author: leefoxx1949
date: '2008-10-20 18:01:22'
layout: post
slug: my-philosophy-and-practice-of-grading
status: publish
title: My Philosophy and Practice of Grading
wordpress_id: '208'
categories:
- V. Essays and Blogs
tags:
- Essays
---

I have taught for over 30 years, mostly history, but also courses in
philosophy, government & political science, psychology, English, and a few
other things. I have taught in public and private high schools, public
community colleges, a private sectarian college I helped to found, maximum and
medium security penitentiaries, two major American universities, and two
Chinese universities. Throughout that time my philosophy and practice of
grading has not changed one bit.My guiding principle for teaching is that the
teacher is first and foremost a servant. I am in the classroom to help the
student learn, not to inflict my personal prejudices on my students or feed my
own ego. I will never consciously violate the trust placed in me by my school
or my students, and when I am uncertain about a student's conduct or
achievement, I will always give the student the benefit of the doubt. I always
set a much higher standard for myself than I do for my students. However, I
also try to push them a little, and generally try to make my first
examinations slightly intimidating. A little hard work and sweat rarely hurt
anyone.

Grading is not an exact science. It is as much an art as it is a science, and
any teacher who thinks he can tell exactly what a student has earned, probably
doesn't know what he is talking about. My favorite evidence for this is a
study done some years ago in which hundreds of experienced teachers were given
thousands of student papers to grade. They were told each student's grade
level, and asked to evaluate each student's performance. Every student in the
study received every grade from A to F! At the very least, this should remind
us of the extremely subjective nature of grading. Even teachers who use
"objective examinations" must subjectively choose which facts to emphasize
and which to ignore. Knowing this, the teacher should make allowance for his
limitations and should evaluate his pupils with a certain amount of humility
and uncertainty.

In determining final grades, I have a rule. When a student is very close to
the border between two grades, I will give him the higher grade, unless the
student has repeatedly missed classes. Over the years I have given many
students one letter grade higher than their total scores indicated they
actually earned. But I have never given any student two letter grades higher.
I am willing to give the student the benefit of the doubt up to a point, but I
do insist in maintaining reasonable standards. I have never in my life given a
student a lower grade than what I honestly believed that student earned.
Never. I do not penalize students who disagree with me or who hold different
religious or political views. I have known many teachers who do this, but I
consider this the height of arrogance and unprofessional conduct. I encourage
my students to disagree with me, so long as they have intelligent reasons for
doing so.

During the Vietnam War when male students who flunked out of college could be
drafted into the military, there was an anti-war professor at my university
who claimed he gave "A" grades to all male students to help them keep out of
the war. To balance the class average he gave "F" grades to female students
who allegedly had nothing to lose. There was another professor who claimed he
threw student papers down the stairs and assigned them grades based upon which
step each paper landed. Longer research papers are heavier and thus travelled
farther, so they deserved the higher grades. Pure physics, according to the
professor. And I have a good friend who never went to college because her
English teacher gave her a "B" grade on a paper which the teacher never
actually read. This caused my friend to miss earning a scholarship by a
fraction of a point, and without the scholarship, she could not afford
college. A couple of years later the teacher actually looked at the paper and
remarked that it was a truly excellent paper. Of course it was then too late
to help her student, but it does provide a negative example of the
consequences of lazy and dishonest teaching practices.

October 21, 2008

Gary L. Todd, Ph.D.

Professor of History

Sias International University

Xinzheng, Henan, China

