---
author: leefoxx1949
date: '2008-10-21 19:10:51'
layout: post
slug: reflections-on-human-rights-abuses-in-china
status: publish
title: Reflections on Human Rights Abuses in China
wordpress_id: '210'
categories:
- V. Essays and Blogs
tags:
- Essays
---

I have friends who tell me about how bad things are in China in the area of
human rights. Most of them have never been to China, but they have read a book
or heard something from someone, or just generally remember how bad communists
have always been. Here are my thoughts on the matter.

I'm sure abuses exist. I've lived in China almost four years and have never
actually seen any abuses, nor have I ever heard any first-hand accounts of
any. But I know something about human nature, so I believe they must exist.
People are probably shaken down by crooked cops, and people with little power
are probably beaten without good cause. However, if this were a widespread
phenomenon, I think it would be reflected on the faces of the people. I would
expect to see fear in the eyes of citizens of a police state. Instead I mostly
see people living out normal, uneventful lives. The ambitious ones are mostly
busy trying to get into a good university. If they have graduated, they are
mostly busy trying to get into graduate school or get a good job. Some are
busy trying to get rich. The peasants are busy doing the boring sorts of
things that peasants normally do. I've never seen anyone look like they feared
anyone in uniform here. Rather, I see people constantly cutting in front of
cop cars on the streets and mostly ignoring the police.

What makes me look at this issue differently from most people is that I have
lived with a plate in my forehead for nearly four decades. You see, around
1971 I was in a city park in Rockford, Illinois, when the cops busted a friend
of mine for no other reason than that his hair was too long. I protested this
illegal arrest and promptly got handcuffed. All the way to the police station
a patrolman with the nametag R BAST kept taunting me about my own hair,
accusing me of being a queer. This to me suggested that the officer had
struggles with his own sexual orientation, and was trying to hide it with an
excessive display of macho. Anyway, at the police station he started beating
up my friend. I peered around the corner to witness it, and promptly got
thrown to the floor and kicked around.

Now the next episode is probably the stupidest thing I have ever done in my
life, but a good cop should have never reacted the way he did. Assuming that R
BAST was in fact a latent homosexual, I blew him a kiss right in front of his
fellow officers. I had great fun with that for about three seconds. Then he
started pounding my head repeatedly onto the concrete floor of the police
station. Right above me was a sign prominently advising me of my rights, one
of which was my alleged right not to be abused. All during this time about a
dozen of Rockford's Finest were laughing. This included a guy wearing
sergeant's stripes. So I guess you can tell me people get tortured in China,
but I would have to reply, "So what? How is that any different from what
happened to me in democratic America?"

The next day they put me in a holding cell with a black guy who had been badly
worked over the night before. The cops had covered his body with welts,
probably with a rubber hose. I suspect it was partly intended as an object
lesson for me. They also added a bunch of extra charges to my initial
disorderly conduct, none of which had any legal merit. When they brought me
before a judge, the judge simply handed me a paper to sign. In exchange for my
immediate release, I agreed to never press charges against the city or police
force of Rockford. I had little choice. I suspect if I hadn't signed, I would
have ended up like that black guy. So I signed and they released me. In 1973 I
had to have part of my skull replaced with plastic and steel because the
fracture had created a situation where the spinal fluid was seeping through
and filling up my forehead. This led to a whole series of other problems, but
that is a different story.

Epilog:  R BAST became one of the elite SWAT team some time later. One day he
was suspended for a week for beating up some Mexican fellow he caught sleeping
at the Colonial Bakery, where, surprisingly, the Mexican was employed. A few
years later my dad sent me a news article about Richard Bast, Junior, who was
arrested for armed robbery. I guess people really do reap what they sow.

None of this actually proves that the Chinese population is _not_ being
systematically abused, but whenever I hear those accusations, I have to think
back on my own experience. My opinion is that we should clean up our own house
first before we presume to clean up our neighbor's. Or, to borrow someone
else's metaphor, perhaps we should remove the log from our own eye before we
try to remove the speck from the other guy's eye.

October 22, 2008

Gary L. Todd, Ph.D.

Professor of History

Sias International University

Xinzheng, Henan, China

