---
author: leefoxx1949
date: '2008-10-19 06:58:09'
layout: post
slug: origin-and-purpose-of-this-website-with-a-note-about-my-photography
status: publish
title: Origin and Purpose of this Website, with a Note about my Photography
wordpress_id: '203'
categories:
- V. Essays and Blogs
tags:
- Essays
---

The idea for this website has evolved over the last few years. Initially, all
I wanted to do was to send photos of China back to friends and family in
America and the world.

I simply attached the photos to my emails until Yahoo abandoned this option
several years ago. I had to look elsewhere to send my photos. Someone
suggested Facebook, so I joined and created several albums. Then someone said
Picasaweb could host far more photos, so I created several dozen photo albums
of Chinese historic and scenic places. By this time I was using PowerPoints
for all my history lectures, creating outlines so students could more easily
follow my lectures. Since I had quite a few photos I've taken over the years,
I naturally added them to my PowerPoint presentations. Students wanted copies
of the photos, so I added albums of historic places around the world. I also
started to photograph Chinese museums to illustrate my lectures on Chinese
history. Since my recent photos are all high-resolution, people interested in
Chinese artifacts began to write and thank me for making these available. So
by the spring of 2008 I decided to attempt to photograph every displayed
artifact in every museum in China and make the photos available to anyone in
the world. This is probably an impossible goal. But as my database grows, its
usefulness to scholars and other interested people will increase.

At present I have created categories for photos of **Chinese Historic Sites**,
**Chinese Museums**, and **Chinese Scenic Places**. I also created the same
three categories for the United States, and finally, the same three for the
rest of the world. Â Unfortunately, my earlier photos were all slides and
prints which I copied with a digital camera, so the viewer will probably
notice a difference in quality between my earlier and more recent albums. One
of my photo albums is in a category by itself. It is part I, section D,
entitled **Sias International University**. This is where I work. It is a
pretty amazing place. I will write more about it later.

The second part of this website will consist of 28 lectures on Chinese
history. These were commissioned in 2007 and completed in the fall of that
year. The college which commissioned them never followed through, so I decided
to make them available for free to people who want the knowledge but don't
care about the academic credit. The more I think about them, the more unhappy
I am with my performance. The PowerPoint text is generally good, and the
photos also, but all of us found the presence of a camera to be intimidating.
I normally thrive on classroom interaction with students, but everyone sat in
back of the camera and generally remained silent as long as the camera was
running. All the good discussions occurred after the camera was turned off, so
you won't see these. I guess I tend to view those lectures as a sort of rough
draft or dress rehearsal. I will improve the PowerPoints for future classes
and hope my actual performance in person will prove somewhat more exciting.
Since doing these lectures, I have learned some new things, or been exposed to
new interpretations. These will not be reflected on the website lectures, but
will be incorporated into future live classes. I will probably add essays to
my website to correct or update my lectures. On a technical note, these
lectures require a massive amount of computer memory, so it will take some
time before they are fully uploaded. Because my technological skills are
limited, someone else will be doing the actual work of uploading them. I will
be mainly doing the photo albums and the essays.

The third part of this website will consist of essays, or blogs. I've taught
for over thirty years and am currently in my fourth year as professor of
history at Sias International University in Xinzheng, China. We have over 100
foreigners on our faculty. Many of them are recent graduates with little
teaching experience. Others have taught before, but not in China. I'm hoping
to share my insights and experiences with them, although what I write will be
posted for anyone in the world to read. Some of the essays will be aimed at
our own community of foreign teachers or others new to life in China. Others
will discuss history, historiography, education, and social commentary. One
project I hope to undertake is to write a history of my own city of Xinzheng,
which is quite literally the birthplace of Chinese civilization. So far as I
know, almost nothing in English has been published on that topic. Just looking
at my Xinzheng photo album (under Chinese Historic Places) should tell you
something about its fascinating past. Finally, I hope to write about some
"life lessons," those things which I have learned through some 59 years of
living and making mistakes. I believe I have learned at least a couple of
things which people might find useful.

A note about my photography: I started taking photos with a Brownie Bullseye
camera using 620 film with 8 shots to a roll. I was 8 years old then, the same
age at which I first experienced the symptoms of Tourette's Syndrome. By the
time I was 11 I had sold my first photo (of an experimental airplane) to the
_Register Republic_ newspaper of Rockford, Illinois. It was used to accompany
an article written by my father, who was aviation and business editor of the
newspaper. I'll write more about my dad in the future, because he was a World
War II P-47 fighter pilot, and I grew up around airplanes. Some years later
dad got me a Fujica half-frame 35mm camera, and some of the earliest photos on
this website were taken with that. I graduated to a Nikon SLR around 1978
while living in Duluth, Minnesota. I generally took slides because they were
cheaper, but I later got a second Nikon, and when I went to China in 1991
carried two cameras with me, one for slides and one for prints. I generally
used the print camera for people photos, and the slide camera for photos of
historic interest. For really important shots I often took both a slide and a
print. By that time I had a Ph.D. in history and was on the lookout for
pictures I could project onto a screen to illustrate my history classes. I
seem to have been one of the few professional historians who was also a
serious amateur photographer, but I thought the combination of interests was
ideal. Not everyone agreed with me. Professional historians frequently
couldn't look beyond written documents as sources of history, while family and
friends thought I was wasting my time photographing all sorts of inanimate
things that might someday be of limited historical value. Nevertheless, I
plodded along taking my photos, oblivious to the fact that people thought I
was wasting my time.

The terror events of 9-11 2001 started a chain reaction which led ultimately
to my losing my teaching jobs and all of my plans for my future. But I
recovered and moved to the Philippine island of Mindanao where I lived for a
year with my wife Amy. I still used the old Nikon film cameras. It took nearly
a year before my government would let me return with my wife, but we finally
got back to Georgia where I could find no meaningful employment. I'll probably
tell about the American education system in a future essay, but finally, I
answered a magazine ad and went to China to teach. China became the land of
opportunity for me. I know that after teaching there one summer in 1991 I was
never quite as happy living in America. So I returned to China and ended up
right in the birthplace of Chinese civilization, and within short driving
distance of many ancient capitals and other historic sites. Time to get back
into photography!

I'm somewhat of a technophobe, so I had resisted digital photography for quite
some time. But when I lived in America, I had to survive by selling off my
family heirlooms and assorted junk on eBay. This required a digital camera, so
I started with a 4 megapixel Minolta. It worked fine for shooting stuff I was
selling, as I could plug the camera into a wall socket and shoot forever. But
when I took it to China, it turned out to be a battery-eater. Besides, I had
been using single lens reflex cameras for years, and this little rangefinder
was just too limited for the opportunities which were beginning to present
themselves. I got Amy an 8 megapixel Sony, and this inspired me to upgrade to
something that was nearly professional quality. I then invested in a 10
megapixel Canon SLR, which is what I am currently using. While it doesn't
totally solve the problem of bad lighting, museum prohibitions against using
tripods and flash, and shooting through glass which is at the same time
reflecting multiple light sources, it does give me some pretty good images
most of the time. The high resolution is especially helpful to people who want
to study the images in detail, so this is pretty much where I am at today in
my photography.

Many beautiful books of Chinese artifacts have been printed, but most of them
are in Chinese and are not readily available to most people in the world.
Moreover, the photos published in books tend to be mostly of the state
treasure variety. I think the more common artifacts sometimes tell us more
about the past than do the artistic masterpieces created for the elites. I
know museums around the world are beginning to put their collections online.
So far this has not happened in China, which has probably the largest number
of ancient artifacts of any country in the world, and one of the longest and
most fascinating histories. So until the professionals get the world's museums
photographed, labeled, and made freely available to everyone in the world, I
intend to do my best to photograph everything I can find of historic or
aesthetic value. Since my home is now in China, this means mostly artifacts of
Chinese history. I am, however, going through all my old photographs as I am
able to locate them, and putting online everything which is even remotely
related to history. Sometimes I have only poor-quality digital photos of print
pictures, or photos of slides projected onto a wall, which means that many of
my earlier photos are not so good. But some of the things I have in my
collection are unique, so I figure that a poor photo may be better than no
photo at all. I really don't expect to profit personally from this website,
but only want to give back to the world some of the things I have been
privileged to see and photograph, or some of the lessons I have learned.

While part of this website is intended as a resource for scholars and educated
laymen, it is, in fact, my personal website. It deals with the things which
are of interest to me. I take full responsibility for any ideas which I will
express here. I will try to get my facts correct and my opinions well-founded,
but I am only human. I have made many mistakes before, and I do not believe
that I have yet attained perfection. Hopefully the benefits of this website
will outweigh the liabilities.

October 19, 2008

Gary L. Todd, Ph.D.

Professor of History

Sias International University

Xinzheng, Henan, China

