---
author: leefoxx1949
date: '2009-06-04 00:54:25'
layout: post
slug: sias-university-graduation-2009
status: publish
title: Sias University Graduation, 2009
wordpress_id: '639'
categories:
- 'I.D. China: Sias International University'
tags:
- Henan Province
- Sias
---

I've been to lots of graduations over the years, daydreamed through countless
graduation speeches, and watched endless streams of eager graduates march off
into their futures. And I've probably forgotten everything I've ever seen or
heard at all those graduations. Until now.

Sias University, where I teach history and do other academic-like things, just
held its 2009 graduation in its new indoor sports arena/assembly hall. This
graduation was actually rather special. I had taught hundreds of the
graduating seniors back when they were freshmen. And again when they were
juniors, I taught many of them British and American history. Since the
students I now teach are all juniors or seniors, I will never again have the
same classes for different courses and in different years. Some of those
students are very special to me. A select group of about 5 or 6 of them formed
a pool from which I recruited people to accompany me to Zhengzhou either to
help negotiate deals, or just to share some yang rou and noodles, or western-
style pizza. More about my students later.

What struck me about this particular graduation, and what I will always
remember, was one seemingly insignificant response to a minor accident. One of
the speakers lost her hat. No big deal, but without missing a beat, the
university's president, Li Haijun, who was seated with all the dignitaries on
stage, got up from his seat, walked across the stage, picked the hat up from
the floor, handed the hat to the speaker, and then returned to his seat. I
don't know how many of the graduates caught it, but there was a lesson more
valuable than anything any of them ever learned in most of their classes. This
was genuine leadership in action.

Chairman Mao Zedong years ago published a pamphlet entitled, _Serve the
People_. In America we still use the title "public servant" to describe our
elected officials. I doubt if one in a hundred officials in either country -
or in any country - actually sees himself first as a servant, and only
secondarily as a leader. More the shame. I think the only person truly worthy
to lead is one who seeks first to serve. Yes, I actually believe this. That is
why I wrote all those character sketches in our soon-to-be-published textbook,
_Speaking Beautiful English_. I genuinely believe that character is the most
important thing we can teach anyone. And here was a graphic illustration of
what I had been writing about.

There was another great university president who also set a marvelous example.
He was also named President Lee. This was President Robert Edward Lee of
Washington College, the same national hero who led my nation in its failed
attempt to return to the independence it had once enjoyed. Anyway, back in the
late 1860s President Lee was vacationing at a spa in the Virginia mountains.
One evening there was a dance. Lee noticed a young lady who was being totally
ignored by all the young men, and for no obvious reason. He inquired, and was
told that the young lady's father was a damnyankee. Naturally, so soon after
experiencing the devastation of invading northern armies, much bitterness
remained in the South.

What Lee did next ranks as one of the greatest moments in the history of
humanity. Lee asked this social outcast for a dance. The greatest hero of the
South danced with the daughter of his former enemy. This action spoke louder
than multitudes of lectures and sermons by legions of professors and
preachers. Lee changed the life and fortunes of one young lady, and taught us
all how to live better. Our own Sias University President Li likewise taught
us a great lesson during our graduation ceremony.

I have attached at the end of this blog a link to a few photos of the
graduation. I didn't bring my own camera, as I was busy lending dignity to the
occasion with my University of Illinois doctoral gown with my non-regulation
graduation cap. The photos mostly came from Amy's camera. They are random
photos of students who wanted to pose with one or both of us after the
ceremony. They represent not even 5% of all the photos taken at that time. The
girl in the spectacular evening gown is Jodie, my former student who is
heading to the University of Newcastle in England for graduate studies. I ate
more than one meal at her house in Zhengzhou, or with her family at a
Zhengzhou restaurant. She was one of my "inner circle." Joy was one of my
more memorable students, too. The others already left for jobs in Shanghai or
Beijing or elsewhere, and did not attend graduation. But at least you can get
a glimpse of our graduation ceremony. The gorgeous lady in many of the photos,
of course, is my wife Amy. I have no logical explanation as to how that
happened.

  

[http://picasaweb.google.com/GaryLeeTodd/SiasUniversityGraduation2009](http://
picasaweb.google.com/GaryLeeTodd/SiasUniversityGraduation2009)#

  

