---
author: leefoxx1949
date: '2010-05-21 19:06:58'
layout: post
slug: evil-women-tyrants-is-history-telling-us-the-truth
status: publish
title: 'EVIL WOMEN TYRANTS: Is History Telling Us the Truth?'
wordpress_id: '1111'
categories:
- V. Essays and Blogs
---

This is the text of a talk delivered at a symposium at Sias University in May,
2010. I have tried to keep it simple, as the audience was made up of non-
native English speakers. It's about women, but it's also about the uses and
abuses of history, and about critical thinking. Historians have a
responsibility for maintaining the highest level of integrity, and one of
their greatest sins is to destroy another person's reputation. This essay is
about two people who have been particularly maligned, and is an attempt to set
the record straight.

I'm going to talk about probably the two most famous women in Chinese history
– and the two most evil. Wu Zetian & Cixi Wu Zhao (Wu Zetian) was a concubine
of Emperor Tang Taizong (Li Shimin) (reigned 626-649 AD) She captivated his
son, the emperor Tang Gaozong (649-683) She suffocated her own newborn
daughter, accused the empress of the crime, & then replaced her She began to
rule in the name of her husband, who was weak & ill She put her own supporters
& family in power & brutally murdered her opponents When Gaozong was paralyzed
by a stroke in 660, Empress Wu dominated China until her death in 705 She had
Gaozong’s wife, ex-empress Wang, and beautiful concubine Xiao murdered She cut
off their arms & legs, & threw them into a wine vat to die She killed or
exiled their supporters & countless others She murdered 12 branches of the
imperial family She created a secret police which ran a reign of terror She
purged the scholars & killed or exiled them & their families She manipulated
the succession after Gaozong’s death She had the crown prince Li Hong poisoned
She had the other princes exiled She had her 3rd son declared emperor After
just 6 weeks she had him charged with treason & deposed She then replaced
Emperor Zhongzong with his brother Ruizong For 6 years she treated Ruizong as
a puppet Finally in 690 she took the throne & became China’s only woman
emperor She promoted herself as a deity & took the title of “Sage Mother” She
made her lover the abbot of White Horse Temple He rewarded Wu by finding the
“Great Cloud Sutra” This was a fake document claiming the Buddha Maitreya
would return as a female deity She established temples in every prefecture to
preach this doctrine She took the title of “Maitreya the Peerless” She had the
great stone buddha at Longmen Grotto carved in her image She declared herself
“Holy and Divine Emperor” of a new Zhou Dynasty She took two young Zhang
brothers as lovers They bullied, got drunk, gambled, & flouted all moral
conventions Bribery & corruption ran rampant Finally the Zhangs were
assassinated & Wu forced to abdicate Her reign of tyranny and evil became a
warning to future generations At least this is the story that has come down to
us in history When you study history, you need to ask the question, “Who wrote
the history?” Why did they write it? Who was paying them to write their
history? Why should we take their word for it? “History is what historians say
it is” Historians have biases Historians want us to believe what they tell us
History is always written by the winner This is not only a Chinese problem All
countries everywhere use & abuse history for their own purposes All winners
try to convince the world that they are right and good All winners try to
convince the world that their enemies are wrong and bad Understanding these
questions is the task of historiography Historiography can be defined as the
Philosophy of History, the History of History, or the Study of History
resulting from a study of the historians who write the history “All History is
Historiography” You cannot understand history unless you understand the people
who wrote the history Who wrote Wu Zetian’s history? Confucian scholars who
were employed by the government That means they were in the service of the Li
family (the emperor) The Wu family had been their rivals In 705 the Li family
was the winner Wu Zetian and her family were the losers But also, Empress Wu
was a woman Women were not supposed to govern countries This had never been
done before – at least not openly This violated the order of the universe
Naturally, she had to be punished The best way to do this was to punish her
reputation Confucian historians told the world all about the evil reign of the
tyrant Wu Let’s examine Wu Zetian again Under her reign China expanded to its
great extent She provided for the needs of the people Her government was
generally regarded as more successful than that of the Li family Even though
she persecuted high officials, she was generous to the lower ranks Commoners
were given the opportunity to work for the government for the first time She
gave promotions & salary increases to her officials She provided relief in
times of famine & natural disaster So what do historians say about Wu Zetian
now? Most historians seem to think that her reign was fairly good for the
common people She was not a great ruler, but she was a good ruler Did she do
all those evil things the historians tell us she did? Probably But so did many
or most emperors and kings in most cultures and countries The historians only
tell us the bad part of her reign They overlook the good parts So when we read
about the evil tyrant Empress Wu, we must first ask ourselves, “Who wrote that
history?” and then we must try to make a balanced view of her reign There was
definitely some evil But there was also definitely some good

Now I want to say something even more controversial This is not the stuff you
learned in your history books The information is relatively new, but I believe
it is correct Let us look at Empress Dowager Cixi – the “Dragon Lady” She was
concubine of Emperor Xianfeng (1851-1861) She was mother of Emperor Tongzhi
(1862-1874) She was suspected of murdering the emperor She was noted for
violent rages She supposedly had many lovers She engaged in sexual orgies She
diverted state money into the Forbidden City She diverted state money into the
Summer Palace Marble Boat was built with money stolen from the navy Emperor
Guangxu (1875-1908) was terrified of her She held him as a prisoner in the
Summer Palace She crushed the “Hundred Days” reform movement & killed its
leaders She encouraged the Boxers (Yihetuan) to destroy all things foreign &
kill foreigners When the 8 Powers invaded China, she urged the emperor to flee
& murdered his concubine who urged him to face the enemy She died in 1908, but
not before she had the emperor killed to prevent him from pursuing more
reforms She had effectively ruled China for 50 years from “behind the curtain”
But is this the real woman people called the “Old Buddha”? Our main source for
the life of Cixi is Sir Edmund Backhouse Backhouse wrote China under the
Empress Dowager in 1910 He also wrote Annals and Memoirs of the Court in
Peking in 1914 The first book went through 8 printings in 18 months It was
translated into many languages, including Chinese It was used by both
republican & communist scholars for many years These books provided all the
shocking details of the depraved life of Cixi Amazingly, only Backhouse seemed
to know most of those details But historians to this day continue to rely on
his works They largely ignore the letters & diaries of many people who had far
more first-hand acquaintance with Cixi than Backhouse ever had These accounts
nearly all portray a Cixi very different from the evil monster of Edmund
Backhouse So who was Edmund Backhouse? In 1974 Hugh Trevor-Roper published
Hermit of Peking: The Hidden Life of Sir Edmund Backhouse He revealed
Backhouse to be a counterfeiter, con man, and a complete fraud Backhouse and
his friends had supported themselves in Peking by forging and selling Chinese
literary masterpieces, court papers, and court diaries This was the material
he used to fabricate his life of Cixi If the source material Backhouse used
was a fraud, then it follows that the two books he wrote based on that source
material are also frauds But people don’t want to think logically about this
They prefer the stories of sex, scandal, and evil which fill the pages of
Backhouse’s books After all, those stories are far more exciting Backhouse
understood his audience England in the “Victorian Age” publicly thought of sex
as evil, but privately were fascinated with it Backhouse understood this and
catered to their prejudices His own history helps to explain his methods and
motives Backhouse had an unhappy childhood He hated his mother, Florence This
probably influenced the hateful image he portrayed of Cixi Backhouse
squandered his inheritance trying to join Oscar Wilde’s circle of homosexuals
He fled England to avoid bankruptcy and ended up in Peking (Beijing) in 1899
He was, however, a genuinely gifted linguist He translated documents for
Morrison, the correspondent of the Times of London In fact, he was probably
the author of many of Morrison’s articles But no one in Peking knew Backhouse
supported himself by writing homosexual pornography His obsession with
pornography probably explains why the theme of sexual perversion underlies all
his writings about Cixi In 1943 he published his memoirs claiming he had a
love affair with Cixi beginning in 1902 when he was 29 and Cixi was 67 He
claimed his first orgy with the Empress took place at the Summer Palace He
claimed he had some 200 sexual encounters with Cixi until her death 6 years
later He also claimed many hundreds or even thousands of love affairs with men
Backhouse’s memoirs are full of pages of pornographic depictions They are also
totally improbable But his image of Cixi is useful A thoroughly evil Empress
of China helps to justify the genuinely evil actions of Western imperialists
in China at the turn of the 20th century One rule of history: always make your
enemy or your victims look as evil as possible This makes your actions appear
to be just and good Remember this fundamental rule of history: The winners
write the history The winners in 1900 blamed the invasion of China on the evil
folly of Cixi To this day, this is the version taught in textbooks But if we
examine the historical sources, we discover that Westerners shot hundreds of
Chinese before the siege of Peking began It appears that the Westerners
provoked the war, rather than the Boxers And it was the foreigners who
pillaged and burned the Hanlin Library That atrocity has always been blamed on
the Chinese Again, Morrison’s stories based on Backhouse’s forgeries form the
basis for our interpretation of the “Boxer Uprising” and the entire era
Backhouse gave us a false picture of Cixi, but he also gave us a false picture
of China and of many other historical events People believe them because they
want to believe them Unfortunately, they are largely lies Scholars are
beginning to discover the truth about Backhouse and his work But many people
oppose these new scholars The works of the older scholars are based on
Backhouse, and if Backhouse is proven wrong, then their own works are
discredited But now we know that Backhouse was a liar and a fraud Has anyone
tried to re-examine the life of Cixi by using sources besides Backhouse? Yes,
in 1992 Sterling Seagrave published a book, Dragon Lady: The Life and Legend
of the Last Empress of China He sought out the sources that most historians
have ignored for the last century He gave us a very different image of Cixi
Cixi was not perfect – she really did have a bad temper – but she appears to
be far more human Emperor Guangxi was not terrified to be around her She did
not engage in wild orgies – no concubine would have had such freedom She did
not squander vast sums of money – that was done largely by the Manchu princes
who actually did rule And many people who actually met her found her quite
charming Much more can be said, but it should be clear that you cannot always
trust the official history “History is what historians say it is” If the
historians are not telling the truth, then the history cannot be trusted
Lesson to be learned: Don’t believe everything people tell you Don’t believe
everything you read Think – and critically examine all relevant pieces of
information If you want to be a leader, you must have correct information
before you can lead

