---
author: leefoxx1949
date: '2011-04-12 17:03:00'
layout: post
slug: the-12000-pound-wasp-by-lee-rorex
status: publish
title: The 12,000 Pound Wasp by Lee Rorex
wordpress_id: '1336'
categories:
- V. Essays and Blogs
tags:
- Essays
---

Captain Lee Rorex and my dad flew in the 389th Fighter Squadron, 366th Fighter
Group, of the 9th United States Army Air Force in Europe during World War II.
This is their stories. See intro to previous post for more. I dedicate this
work to Maj. Dean Todd (ret.) and Capt. Lee Rorex, who were ordinary men who
did a great job and are true heroes, though they would never call themselves
that. --- Gary Lee Todd

Imagine being twenty-one, a brand new 2nd Lieutenant searching for fighter
pilot glory, and getting this announcement: “Lieutenant, you’ve been assigned
to a P-47 Training Unit.” P-47! The Thunderbolt! 2,000 horse power radial
engine, big as the side of a barn, slow as a truck! What happened to that
sleek, pointed-nose P-51? Or that fighter pilot’s glorious dream the double
pointed-nose P-38? F-O-U-L!!

“Men, welcome to the P-47 Training Unit. I’d ask how many of you volunteered
for this Unit, except that all of us here are well aware that every one of you
probably wanted to fly the P-51, right?”

Yeah, right! But, that’s the army for you! And, THIS IS the U.S. Army Air
Corps, Feb. 1944. They say it, I do it! Me and this 12,000 pound aluminum wasp
are stuck with each other!

So, here I sit in this bucket of bolts at the end of the runway. Ease the
throttle forward, lock the tail wheel, now give her the gun. Whee-e-e doggie!
The power pins me to the seat! In the air, Hey! It handles like a baby! Dive
it; get maneuvering speed and pull it up into a loop. Man alive! It handles
beautifully! And that power! Who wants to fly a P-51? Quickest first flight
conversion ever performed!

And, it will carry more weight, deliver more fire power, take more punishment
and still fly, than any airplane ever built! Yeah, and back home, I’ll bet you
could plow with it!

“Well, boys, welcome to France and ground-support combat.” Listen now! This is
me; the same guy with his nose stuck up in the air; only, eight months,
twenty-three combat missions and a lot of smarts later. “Are you still sulking
because you aren’t a P-51 glory boy?”

“Oh, sometimes I guess. But, Lee, will we NEVER get a chance at air-to-air
combat? Will it always be just air-to-ground support?”

“Well, I’ll level with you; I flew my twenty-third mission yesterday and met
enemy aircraft for the first time.”

“Oh, no!” “Hell!” “I was afraid of that!” (Lousy replacements! They never get
here with an appreciation of the P-47 and close ground support!)

“Well, I sympathize with you, boys. But then, there’s Capt. Koff. He’s been
over here a year and a half; he has 124 missions and 320 hours of combat time
and has encountered enemy aircraft only once.” (Now listen to ‘em yell.)

“Oh, hell!”  “What a way to go!”

Now it’s time to get them indoctrinated. “Let me tell you what it’s like over
here. Every mission takes us to, and across, the Rhine River now. And, on
every mission we take ground fire like you wouldn’t believe. And, we do get
hit once in a while.”

“Yeah, with what?”

“Well, I could answer that; but, here’s somebody who can do a better job. This
is Lt. Gordon who owes his life to the endurance of the P-47. Listen to his
story.”

“Hi, fellows. It’s true, what Lee says. There were eight of us up around
Dusseldorf, doing a bombing and strafing job on a railroad marshalling yard.
Those transportation centers are guarded like they were oil wells. Every
caliber gun you can name is in use when you go down on them. From a hand held
Luger to a 180 Howitzer, they are shooting at you! Well, I took a hit in the
left wing, just outside the wing root. It exploded what ammunition was left,
and when the smoke cleared away I saw a hole three feet wide and running from
the front wing spar to within four inches of the trailing edge. I’m telling
you, any three of us could have stood inside that hole.” Gordon stopped and
let this sink in.

Somebody said, “Geez!”

Gordon continued, “Well, my first impulse was to jump. But then, I saw I was
still flying, and the wing was still on there. So, I brought her home.”

A new man gasped in amazement. “And landed? With a wing like that?” he asked.

“Yep,” Gordon replied, “and walked away and that wing was still on there. My
life was spared because this old Thunderbolt could take it.”

Looks of wonder adorned those new faces and, while they were engaged in being
dumbstruck, I called up another man to incite some more admiration.

“Boys, this is Lt. Crusan. He flew back from a mission with one cylinder shot
completely away. Tell us about it, Charlie.”

The new men were really dumbstruck as Crusan began.

“It’s true; the cylinder at the one o’clock position was gone. The piston and
push rod were gone, along with all the oil! It was all over the windshield! I
hung my head out the side and landed that machine, taxied into the revetment
and shut off the engine just like normal. Nobody watching could believe it.
Well, as soon as that power was turned off, the old engine gave a loud groan
and simply stopped. With all the oil gone, all the metal was so hot that every
piece of that engine simply welded itself to whatever it was touching! The
whole engine was a solid mass of fused metals. But you know, that didn’t
happen until that old P-47 brought me home safely.”

Wish you could have seen the astounded looks on those faces.

And, with that kind of built-in reliability, we blow Hitler’s trucks, trains,
guns, supplies and soldiers all to hell! We follow the American dogfaced
soldiers as they mop up the Ruhr Valley, Germany’s most heavily industrialized
area. We clear the way from the air so the ground soldier doesn’t get hung up.
If there is such a thing as glory in an air war, this is certainly not it!

We seldom get into an air-to-air dogfight - the kind that produces ACES and
instant HOMEFRONT BOND SALESMEN. We always leave home loaded with bombs,
rockets, and enough fifty caliber shells to decorate Washington, D.C. at
Christmastime. We fight dogfights when we get jumped by the Jerries, or when
flying escort for our big, four-engine brothers. Although trained for aerial
combat, we are not efficient at the task nor apt to get that way. The
following accounts, then, must, of necessity, be accepted for exactly what
they are - stories of dive bomber pilots fighting for their own lives under
the stress of air-to-air combat - “when it was nose to nose, him or me, live
or die.” If you can discount the fact that in many of these cases pilots die,
friends are lost, we extract the humor where it is to be found.

Today my friend Russell took his first step toward becoming an Ace. He shot
down an enemy plane in mortal combat. Four more and he’ll join the magic
circle.

Russ was flying Trombetta’s wing on a regular dive bombing mission. From out
of nowhere the Germans swarmed in. The P-47 boys jumped into the fray.
Trombetta, the leader, went after an ME-109. Russell, his wingman and tail
protector, hung back. The 109, followed by two P-47s, racked into a tight left
turn, drawing all three into a left circle. Suddenly, coming in from the
right, another ME-109 slid into the circle between Trombetta and Russell. Why
he chose to latch onto the front man instead of the last man no one knows.
But, his choice sealed his doom! Russell opened up with his eight fifty
caliber machine guns and blew the errant German Airman out of the sky. Russ
called it, “fortuitous ace-making.”

And sometimes there is just no humor to be extracted. McCauley, from Florida,
has been in the outfit for maybe a week. He tends to be quiet and, with his
hands in his pockets, he listens a lot. Since he had only his training time
behind him, he’ll have maybe two-hundred and fifty hours total flying time.
Perhaps I’ve seen this man a half dozen times. His personality appeals to me
and, I think I may have found a new friend. But, find in vain! Today, Mac flew
his first combat mission in the European Theater of Operations, was shot down
by a German flyer, and died. Tonight I’m looking for another new friend!
That’s the way it is.

And Struth. He came in about the same time as Mac, but he was different. He
had remained in the States as an instructor pilot after getting his wings. His
total hours may run up as high as three or four thousand, with about fifty in
the P-47. Today, Struth flew his first combat mission in the European Theater
of Operations, was shot down by a German flier, and died. I never had a chance
to learn his first name!

And then, sometimes, there is just the opposite: instant hero.

This one’s name is Driesler; Dries for short. Fresh in the outfit from
Kentucky, with a crooked Dick Tracy nose, and a smile as big as his home
state. On this day Dries flew his first combat mission and shot down a Focke-
Wulf 190. He knocked the German off his leader’s tail, just as Russell did a
few days before.

So, we tease Dries, accusing him of taking the easiest way into making friends
in the outfit. For sure, he has one lifetime friend - his leader on that
mission.

Pilot Log Entry: 3/2/45 South of Bahn. Strafed motor transport. Met ME-262.

We are on a regular bombing mission today. We’re loaded down and struggling
out to the target at 150 miles an hour. Someone calls in, “Bogies, two o’clock
high.”

We look and, sure enough, there they are: black, sleek and fast, with that big
Swastika flashing the danger signal. There are only two of them and, since we
are a twelve ship squadron, we figure they’ll stay away. So, we watch as they
circle.

“Hey, Slipshod Red Leader,” comes a call, “do you identify those Bogies?
Over.”

“Negative.”

“Hey, Red, I believe they’re jets. Over.”

“Jets?”

“Yeah, the brand new ones, the ME-262. Over.”

“Red Leader, Blue Leader here. He’s right. That’s the 262, alright. Over.”

In our powerful P-47s we are King of Air-To-Ground. But, facing aerial combat
with the new German jet? Well, that’s an equine of a different hue! Of course,
we’ve only heard the stories: 600, 700 miles an hour; more maneuverable than a
P-51; and nobody, but nobody, could ever hit one in flight! As we look, we
know fear.

Sure enough, the two sharks high above dip and start a run on us. They are
going to take on all twelve of us at the same time. With twelve ships to shoot
at, how can they miss?

Our Red Leader today is Kelly. Long and lanky, an easy smile, and with an air
of confidence.

As the Germans turn in and down, Kelly’s confident voice comes over our
radios: “Slipshod, Red Leader here. Now, listen up! Do exactly what I do,
nothing else! Don’t jettison any bombs or rockets. We’ll beat this one.”
Smooth and confident. He obviously has a plan, and, you can bet every one of
us is ready to follow it.

The Germans, taking advantage of altitude and speed, are dropping in on our
tails. Different pilots keep reporting their exact position as the angle
changes. When Peterson calls in, “Bogies high, six o’clock, dead on,”
(directly on our tails), comes the still confident voice of our leader: “O.K.,
Slipshod, do a tight turn left, NOW!”

And, we do. We stand those air-ground tanks up on their wingtips, pull back on
the stick and advance the throttle. Those heavy old Thunderbolts respond with
a slowdown and a very small diameter turn. Immediately, every pilot grins, or
laughs out loud. The German Jets, positively rocketing in at 600 or 700 miles
an hour, can never hope to turn inside of us; and this they must do in order
to hit us in the air. It’s called curve of pursuit. With guns throwing bullets
‘way off into space, the Jets slide right on past us like someone grasping for
the brass ring in a merry-go-round. Totally ineffective.

We watch as they pull up, and up, and finally just perch up there, looking. At
which point comes Kelly’s voice over the radio again: “Slipshod, Red Leader
here, you got the picture. These boys can’t stay here more than three or four
minutes; they don’t carry enough fuel.” Ah, ha! A leader who has done his
homework!

And, here they come again! Same speed, same direction. They can’t be very
experienced. We watch, turn, avoid and laugh as the highly touted, newly
developed German Jets slide away and disappear. And, twelve pilots of the
heavy, waddling old P-47, the overweight aluminum wasp, breathe a thankful
prayer, realizing we are alive to be a little smarter.

Our twelve planes, rockets and bombs still ready, guns still heavy with
unwasted ammo, go our lumbering way and blow up two truck convoys, along with
multiple tons of supplies and equipment, and send along a few hundred Germans
to their everlasting, freedom-destroying rewards. The highly advanced
technology of their air wing did them no good this day.

And, I’ve racked up another forty or fifty German-type humans, dead under my
guns.

**********          **********          **********  
Jan. 1, 1945, a memorable day for everyone, more memorable for some. This day
the German Air Force makes a glorious, all-out effort and hits Allied Lines
north and south, clear across Belgium and Germany. Allied estimates put the
figure at 10,000 planes launched by the Germans today, most probably flown by
teen-age boys for lack of properly trained pilots. One can only guess that
their intent is to scare us out of the war.

But, cunning is the German mind. Last night, New Year’s Eve, he kept all of
his pilots cold sober. Meanwhile, at least every other Allied pilot, mechanic,
dog-face, paddlefoot and cook was smashed to the gills!! Came daylight, this
A.M., a slight inequity in manpower stability existed.

My group is based on Location Y-29 near Watershei, Belgium. Muddleheaded and
still celebrating, a bunch of us are sitting at breakfast swilling large
amounts of black coffee. From far off, it seems, we hear what could be the
bark of machine guns. But, we don’t really pay much attention.

Suddenly, someone bursts into the mess tent. “Hit the deck,” he yells, “we’re
under air attack!”

Air attack? Impossible! That’s something we do to them. So, do us cocky and
confident American pilots hit the deck? Hell no! We amble out for a look.

Outside, we look. There are a few planes around. But, man, that’s what an
airfield is all about. P-51s, P-47s, a few Focke-Wulfs and Messerschmitts, and
--- A FEW FOCKE WULF’S AND MESSERSCHMITTS!!

“HIT THE DECK! HERE THEY COME AGAIN!” and, sure enough, here they come! An
FW-190 is flaggin’ it low right over our heads, machine guns chattering. With
this added persuasion, us cocky and confident American pilots dive into holes,
under tarps, trailers, or whatever! The bastards are actually strafing our
field!

I raise my head and look up just as a P-47 is rolling for his takeoff. As his
wheels break ground, about midpoint on the runway, the pilot opens up with his
eight fifty caliber machine guns and blasts a low flying ME-109 right out of
the air. My vision registers a pilot and plane, an explosion, bits and pieces.
It will do things to you, friend.

“Here they come again!” comes the cry. We dive again, but can’t resist another
look. Here comes another ME-109, low, fast and blazing away at anything and
everything. The pilot is either dedicated or dumb! On his tail are two P-47s,
blazing away at him, and kicking up the dirt all around us!

ZOOM-M-M, they go over. WHOOM-M-M, the 109 disintegrates, not over 100 feet
off the ground!

“Anything else comin’ in?”

“Naw.”

We stand up. I see two P-51s latch onto a German plane in the air. In about
fifteen seconds his goose is cooked. The leader shoots the German in a left
turn; the wingman shoots him in a right turn; and POW! Gone.

Our Group manages to get up maybe a dozen P-47s. A P-51 Group, billeted across
the field, gets up a few, no one knows how many. Together, they go up against
an estimated 100 Germans intent upon wiping our field off the face of the
earth. Result? No American losses. Germans? 22 planes shot down, with three
possible but not verified.

For the next fifteen minutes, we on the ground are treated to the doggondest
airshow ever staged as each victorious pilot roars in low and up with his
victory roll.

In the midst of all the celebration a P-47 lands and the pilot jumps out of
his plane, yelling at the top of his voice, “I got the bastard with my air-to-
ground rockets!”

Sure enough, out of ammo and still up there with all the action, he’d seen a
190 crossing his path in front and out of range. So, in his own words, “I just
pulled my nose in front of him, lifted it up until it blanked him out, and let
go my rockets. I let the nose down just in time to see that son-of-a-bitch
blow into a million pieces!” Air-to-ground rockets? No aerodynamic qualities,
no control, designed to do only one thing and that’s FALL, STRAIGHT DOWN! And
half the time miss! Well, heroes are born, not made.

**********          **********          **********  
The Battle of the Bulge is in progress. Based at Liege, Belgium, we’re only
minutes away. We sit here under a solid blanket of fog, unable to move.

Day after day we have waited. Some days we have even gone out to our planes,
climbed in and just sat! Just so we could be ready if that fog lifted! But, no
luck.

Today things broke up a bit, but only a bit. The overhead ceiling is three to
four hundred feet. Above that is maybe six tenths cloud cover (meaning that
the holes cover only four tenths of the sky). The weather is good only for
desperation effort; and, in this weather we have gotten off two missions. I’ve
drawn the third one and we’re ready to go.

PILOT LOG ENTRY: 12/27/44 Malmedy. Jumped by 190s and 109s. Got one twenty MM
in left gun bay.

We are down around Bastogne, at about a thousand feet, dodging clouds and
looking for Germans on the ground. This is a helluva way to go! All of a
sudden, rat-a-tat-tat-tat! Machine gun fire, and I can hear it! Inside my
heavy, loud, noisy P-47, I can hear it! And, I know why! In the air, a pilot
can hear machine guns only if they are being shot from directly behind him.
Old TAIL END CHARLIE has had it again!

A look back confirms the worst. A huge white and black propeller spinner is
parked right on my tail, and, by deductive reasoning, I arrive at the
conclusion that the rest of that FW-190 is right behind. The logic of my
reasoning process is proved immediately. Bullets by the hundred start
streaming past my cockpit and I can see the every fifth one which is a tracer,
red and fiery. There is a pilot on that trigger and he is bent on my doom!

In addition to saving my life here, I have a duty to my fellow flyers; so, I
push the mic button, scream, “BREAK, SLIPSHOD, BREAK!” like any good Tail End
Charlie should, at the same time racking into a tight right turn, the German’s
bullets flashing to my side.

Now, it’s just him or me, nose to nose, live or die. And, at the moment, he’s
got the upper hand! I go up; he goes up. I sweat. I chop the throttle and skid
left; he stays right behind, still shooting. I sweat! Having started at only a
thousand feet, I am suddenly down to treetop level. I dive into a small valley
and pray he has a thing about valleys. He obviously doesn’t; he’s still
shooting and I’m still sweating.

Contour flying now, I pull up and over a small hill and down into another
valley. My adversary is still blasting away but it is a fact that I have
awareness enough to observe a jeep apparently stalled in the middle of a small
river. There are four soldiers out in the water, perhaps trying to push it. As
we scream overhead, I hope that the bullets miraculously missing me don’t hit
them. I am still sweating, the German still shooting; by all rights, he should
have had me by now.

I am forced to pull up for another hill, and do so reluctantly. The higher I
get, the less he has to worry about the ground. But, where are the bullets? I
look back and, thank God, there is the full belly silhouette of the German
plane as he pulls up and does a turnaround. He is breaking off! He is
quitting! In seconds we are far apart. The death threat is gone!

More an automaton than a person, I reach out to the throttle and slow that
overheated and pounding engine. Reality creeps in on my consciousness; I’m not
going to die! Not going to die! My breath is coming in labored gasps. My eyes
blur and I actually black out for a brief instant.

Another reality creeps in. My stomach and thighs are wet, oppressively wet.
Oh, no! Wounded and didn’t know it! Damn! I look down, expecting to see blood
all over, but there is none. Just wet. But, in my fear, had I simply urinated
all over myself? But then, awareness; there on my stomach hangs the loose end
of my oxygen hose, dangling from my face mask. When not in use for oxygen, it
simply dangles, serving no purpose, except to conduct all the sweat from my
face and dump it in my lap! I burst out in a laugh, one third amusement, two
thirds sheer mental and physical relief. More relaxed now, I wonder, for the
first time, what kept my mother’s little boy alive this day.

Out of chaos, humor. In reliving this incident many times over the last forty
years, a pertinent factor stands out in my mind. Sometime during this gut-
wrenching ordeal, while death lurked only one explosive bullet away, I had
felt the need to communicate my plight to my flight leader, miles away and
probably engaged in a fight for his own life. At this juncture, I had pressed
my mic button and yelled, “Slipshod Red Leader, this is Yellow four. I’m on
the deck, headed west with an FW-190 on my tail!” My death scream.

From out of nowhere had come faithful Red Leader’s reply. “Stay with him, big
boy!”

**********          **********          **********  
Just an ordinary guy doing a job. But then, all jobs that big are done by
ordinary guys. And each one, like the pilot, expending the Universal Spiritual
Soul which all of us share. Martin Buber called it THEOPHANY – the meeting
between man and God.

&nbsp_place_holder;

